Research interests
I am interested in dynamical systems and the dynamics of nonlinear waves arising in models of physical and biological phenomena. Such systems are typically described by ordinary and partial differential equations (ODEs/PDEs), and I am particularly interested in the development of geometric and analytical techniques to study the bifurcation, existence and stability of emergent waves and patterns in the associated models.

Much of my recent work has focused on systems with widely separated time (or length) scales, or so-called 'fast-slow' systems. These arise ubiquitously in a wide variety of models of natural phenomena; examples include differing timescales in neural or cardiac rhythms, differing spatial scales in astrophysical gas dynamics or long vs. short range interaction in the formation of vegetation patterns. The challenge in studying such systems lies in the fact that the associated equations are singularly perturbed, which can result in remarkably rich and complex dynamics. My approach to these problems draws on dynamical systems tools, including geometric singular perturbation theory, blow-up techniques and canard theory.

My research is supported by NSF grants DMS-2204758 and DMS-2105816.

For information regarding REUs and recent undergraduate research projects, see undergraduate research.
Recent and ongoing projects
Vegetation pattern formation and dynamics
Stripes
In semiarid regions, limited water resources result in the formation of vegetation patterns. On flat ground, one may observe spots or disorganized labyrinth patterns, while on sloped terrain vegetation can align in resilient stripes or bands. I am especially interesed in the formation of these stripe patterns and their relation to the downhill flow of water. To this end, I am studying a general class of singularly perturbed reaction-diffusion-advection PDE models, and I am focussing on the large advection limit to explain the appearance of spatially localized stripe patterns and the stabilizing effect of downhill advection of water.

Collaborators: R. Bastiaansen, A. Doelman
Single and double pulses in the FitzHugh--Nagumo system
Banana
The FitzHugh-Nagumo PDE is a widely studied simplification of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations of mathematical physiology describing nerve axon dynamics. This system admits nerve impulse (or pulse) solutions which travel with fixed speed. We constructed such solutions in a regime in which the tails of the pulses develop small oscillations; upon parameter continuation, these oscillations grow into a second copy of the primary pulse, forming multipulse solutions. We are currently working to extend these methods to the infinite dimensional setting of the spatially discrete FitzHugh-Nagumo system.

Collaborators: H.J. Hupkes, J. Rademacher, B. de Rijk, B. Sandstede
Spike adding systems
Many systems exhibit periodic bursting solutions, comprised of slow phases and active bursting phases which contain a sequence of spikes. Bursting solutions with different numbers of spikes can exist in nearby parameter regimes, and numerical observations suggest that different branches of spiking solutions are connected. I am working to understand mechanisms which result in continuous transitions between solutions with different numbers of spikes and to construct these transitions rigorously.
Patterns and invasion fronts
This projects investigates how invasion processes can select patterns. We focus on the FitzHugh-Nagumo system in a regime where oscillatory patterns can spread into an unstable homogeneous state. The pattern is selected from a family of periodic wave train solutions by an invasion front which describes the leading edge of the spreading process.

Collaborators: A. Scheel

A class of two-fast, one-slow multiple timescale dynamical systems is considered that contains the system of ordinary differential equations obtained from seeking travelling-wave solutions to the FitzHugh-Nagumo equations in one space dimension. The question addressed is the mechanism by which a small-amplitude periodic orbit, created in a Hopf bifurcation, undergoes rapid amplitude growth in a small parameter interval, akin to a canard explosion. The presence of a saddle-focus structure around the slow manifold implies that a single periodic orbit undergoes a sequence of folds as the amplitude grows. An analysis is performed under some general hypotheses using a combination ideas from the theory of canard explosion and Shilnikov analysis. An asymptotic formula is obtained for the dependence of the parameter location of the folds on the singular parameter and parameters that control the saddle focus eigenvalues. The analysis is shown to agree with numerical results both for a synthetic normal-form example and the FitzHugh-Nagumo system.

Keywords: Canards, traveling waves, periodic orbits, FitzHugh–Nagumo system, geometric singular perturbation theory.

Equation-free modeling aims at extracting low-dimensional macroscopic dynamics from complex high-dimensional systems that govern the evolution of microscopic states. This algorithm relies on lifting and restriction operators that map macroscopic states to microscopic states and vice versa. Combined with simulations of the microscopic state, this algorithm can be used to apply Newton solvers to the implicitly defined low-dimensional macroscopic system or solve it more efficiently using direct numerical simulations. The key challenge is the construction of the lifting and restrictions operators that usually require a priori insight into the underlying application. In this paper, we design an application-independent algorithm that uses diffusion maps to construct these operators from simulation data. Code is available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5793299.

Motivated by pulse-replication phenomena observed in the FitzHugh--Nagumo equation, we investigate traveling pulses whose slow/fast profiles exhibit canard-like transitions. We show that the spectra of the PDE linearization about such pulses may contain many point eigenvalues that accumulate onto a union of curves as the slow scale parameter approaches zero. The limit sets are related to the absolute spectrum of the homogeneous rest states involved in the canard-like transitions. Our results are formulated for general systems that admit an appropriate slow/fast structure.

This paper examines a spike-adding bifurcation phenomenon whereby small-amplitude canard cycles transition into large-amplitude bursting oscillations along a single continuous branch in parameter space. We consider a class of three-dimensional singularly perturbed ODEs with two fast variables and one slow variable and singular perturbation parameter ε≪1 under general assumptions which guarantee such a transition occurs. The primary ingredients include a cubic critical manifold and a saddle homoclinic bifurcation within the associated layer problem. The continuous transition from canard cycles to N-spike bursting oscillations up to 𝑁∼𝒪(1/ε) spikes occurs upon varying a single bifurcation parameter on an exponentially thin interval. We construct this transition rigorously using geometric singular perturbation theory; critical to understanding this transition are the existence of canard orbits and slow passage through the saddle homoclinic bifurcation, which are analyzed in detail.

We analyze the bifurcation diagrams of spatially localized stationary patterns that exhibit a long spatially periodic interior plateau (referred to as localized rolls). In a wide variety of contexts, these bifurcation diagrams consist of isolas or of intertwined s-shaped curves that are commonly referred to as snaking branches. These diagrams have been rigorously analyzed by connecting the existence curves of localized rolls with the bifurcation structure of fronts that connect the rolls to the trivial state. Previous work assumed that the stable and unstable manifolds of rolls were orientable. Here, we extend these results to the nonorientable case and also discuss topological barriers that prevent snaking, thus allowing only isolas to occur. The results are applied to the Swift–Hohenberg system for which we show that nonorientable roll patterns cannot snake.

Localized roll patterns are structures that exhibit a spatially periodic profile in their center. When following such patterns in a system parameter in one space dimension, the length of the spatial interval over which these patterns resemble a periodic profile stays either bounded, in which case branches form closed bounded curves (``isolas"), or the length increases to infinity so that branches are unbounded in function space (``snaking"). In two space dimensions, numerical computations show that branches of localized rolls exhibit a more complicated structure in which both isolas and snaking occur. In this paper, we analyze the structure of branches of localized radial roll solutions in dimension 1+$\varepsilon$, with $0<\varepsilon\ll1$, through a perturbation analysis. Our analysis sheds light on some of the features visible in the planar case.

In water-limited regions, competition for water resources results in the formation of vegetation patterns; on sloped terrain, one finds that the vegetation typically aligns in stripes or arcs. We consider a two-component reaction–diffusion–advection model of Klausmeier type describing the interplay of vegetation and water resources and the resulting dynamics of these patterns. We focus on the large advection limit on constantly sloped terrain, in which the diffusion of water is neglected in favor of advection of water downslope. Planar vegetation pattern solutions are shown to satisfy an associated singularly perturbed traveling wave equation, and we construct a variety of traveling stripe and front solutions using methods of geometric singular perturbation theory. In contrast to prior studies of similar models, we show that the resulting patterns are spectrally stable to perturbations in two spatial dimensions using exponential dichotomies and Lin's method. We also discuss implications for the appearance of curved stripe patterns on slopes in the absence of terrain curvature.

The Klausmeier equation is a widely studied reaction-diffusion-advection model of vegetation pattern formation on gently sloped terrain in semiarid ecosystems. We consider the case of constantly sloped terrain and study the formation of planar vegetation stripe patterns which align in the direction transverse to the slope and travel uphill. These patterns arise as solutions to an underlying traveling wave equation, which admits a separation of scales due to the fact that water flows downhill faster than the rate at which vegetation diffuses. We rigorously construct solutions corresponding to single vegetation stripes as well as long wavelength spatially periodic wave trains using geometric singular perturbation theory. Blow-up desingularization methods are needed to understand slow passage of solutions near a degenerate transcritical bifurcation. The underlying geometry of the traveling wave equation predicts relations between pattern wavelength, speed, and terrain slope.

